(Rephrase because this is in pamphlet.)

Everyday words do not communicate, they are much better understood oppositely: they are blockages of communication, evolved to divide, channel, distort, and otherwise institutionalize the human community to increase utility of the most powerful groups. It is one of the largest and most powerful set of mechanisms for maintaining capitalism because they are the million little signposts which at every moment point to people which roads pay. At every fork in our road, at those specific moments when we do have the resources to choose good or evil, words always send us toward capitalism because words (logos) at best are merely true (a car which doesn't come with an engine, let alone fuel). Logic and reason are motion-neutral, "disinterested" objective analysis cannot tell anyone what to value, as only subjective desire and commitment can propel and direct a person's projects — but in a dynamic system *defined by* the instrumental exploitation of humans, then disinterested logos and ratio is exploitation.  Strong logical reasoning is always paid because good thinking always strays and is always at risk of overthrowing the status quo.  Words provide the service of absorbing a society's cognitive capacities into channels which prevent volatile shifts of group movement. And we are simply paid to use those words which absorb or mystify or deflect human desire into a desire for capitalism. We earn nothing if we use words which fail to channel human desire into exploitation, and finally we are punished to the degree our words challenge or inconvenience powerful actors.
