It is also around this time that the notion of "Public Opinion" gains serious currency, as in the writings of someone such as Walter Lippmann. Specifically, its emergence appears to have relied on the extraordinary success of American and British propaganda during World War I. It only became possible to speak of something called "public opinion" *after* national elites succeeded in using radio and newspapers to hammer millions of diverse hearts and minds into a mass public desire for war against Germany.

It is possible to get the impression today that only in the past few decades has the desire of the masses ever received close, systematic attention from government officials, as if only recently popular sovereignty has become scientific. But the desire of the masses has always been critical in politics, and has always been given close attention. Autocrats have always had to ensure that they not deviate too far from the desire of the masses, because that's when they get deposed. Public desire has always been important, and has always been studied by the ruling class, as a problem. There is very little evidence for the uncritical assumptions of contemporary political scientists that the study of public opinion is for the purpose of helping government officials better execute the will of the people. Here, interpretation of modern polling data using the language of political radicalism is far more consistent with the historical evidence than "common sense" language: the study of public opinion today is for the purpose of ensuring that the masses never get too angry. 

Whenever public opinion falls too low, something can always be done as a response; something to appease the masses and restore their faith in the system. The scientific study of public opinion, however, transforms the desire of the masses into the demands of the masses. And this is why it is one of the most marvelous counterrevolutionary devices ever evolved.

Beginnings:

- Ironically, it was the French Minister of Finance in the years just before the French Revolution who first pointed out the importance of *l'opinion publique*. Jacques Neckar was concerned with what we now call "investor confidence" and he advocated for the publishing of government accounts and policies.

- The Declaration of Independence: The very language of the Declaration of Independence requires that public opinion be taken into account. Our government functions expressly with "the consent of the governed."

- Abraham Lincoln Said: "What I want to get done is what the people desire to have done, and the question for me is how to find that out exactly." Lincoln, certainly a President with a less than unanimous approval rating, stated outright his belief in the public mandate. In his case, he used the notion of the will of the people to fight a war.

- Straw Polls: Newspapers often augmented their election coverage by interviewing voters as they left the polling place. These impromptu interviews were called "straw polls," and the first one recorded in the U.S. took place in 1824. By the turn of the century they were common in both local and national newspapers and magazines.

- Gallup: During the early years of the 20th century the rise of the social sciences in education and government brought sociology and statistics into the public consciousness. Market research firms were born — designed to help manufacturers make and market products of mass appeal.
Among the first of the practitioners of scientific polling, George Gallup founded the American Institute of Public Opinion in 1936. He quickly began to apply polling techniques to fields far beyond marketing. Soon after, The Roper and Crossley Poll (FORTUNE Poll) and Harris Poll were also up and running. The National Opinion Research Center was founded in 1941, the first non-commercial polling agency.

Today, the concept of "public opinion," as it is used by journalists and political scientists, tends to refer to an aggregate variable, a social average, which reflects the ebbs and flows of individuals' thoughts and attitudes toward some societal issue. Today, we are taught that "public opinion" refers to how the public answers the big social questions which a democratic populace must decide for itself in order to indicate the path politicians must follow. But the history of this concept reveals that, historically, the answer came before the question. At least in its modern founding, the answers of "public opinion" to the most important political questions of the time were quite explicitly decided by state elites *first*; newspapers and radios among other increasingly "mass" media were used to merely pose the right questions.

It is in this time that "propaganda" comes to have a bad name, when Americans and Germans realize they're both being manipulated. In people like Lippman and Bernays, we observe the high point of unapologetic, unashamed elitism arguing very frankly for elites to use propaganda, via the increasingly "mass" media, to promote their visions of how society should be organized.

To the typical university student today, the connection of these simple facts will sound almost like a conspiracy theory. But if this story sounds like a conspiracy theory, it is not because any of the preceding facts have been contrived or summarized fantastically: it is only because when elites actually organize to manipulate mass publics for their own political purposes, it indeed is something near to an actual conspiracy.[^conspiracy]

[^conspiracy]: It would be interesting to trace the history of when and how exactly "conspiracy theory" emerged as a pejorative term to dismiss certain accounts of political history. No doubt there will always exist many truly deranged and unverifiable narratives of political affairs, which are perhaps rightly derided as "conspiracy theories" and rejected. But it also cannot be denied that conspiracies or just conspiratorial tendencies do in fact emerge from time to time in political affairs! And it would seem to me that the pejorative power of the term "conspiracy theory" is itself a little piece of propaganda, as it tends to very successfully neutralize even perfectly true and well-documented narratives of elites engaged in actually sinister behavior! An enterprising student could trace the emergence of this term as a popular notion, when and how it gains its pejorative power and capacity to political neutralize truths about elites which otherwise would indict and threaten their public support.
