From the 1920s until the end of World War II, the conventional wisdom was that the role of mass
media in modern society was, and ought to be, an instrument of propaganda for the optimal
functioning of the state (@Bernays:2004vo; @lippmann1932public). At the same time, the war efforts marshalled an extraordinary amount of resources toward increasing elite knowledge of the information and communication sciences. The famous interstate contests of encrypting and deciphering secret codes are perhaps the best known example of this, but the developments in weaponry (for instance, anti-aircraft technology) as well as strategy (game theory) were first and foremost due to advances in the understanding of communication and information. Indeed, the mathematical theory of communication and information, as we will see, was essentially be the basis of the digital revolution and therefore everything we now associate with the information age (@Shannon:2013iy; @gleick2011information). Quite naturally, the post-war period saw a flowering of social-scientific efforts to link the propaganda role of media to this burgeoning framework of information theory [@wiener1965cybernetics; @Deutsch:1953ww; @Deutsch:1966ux; @McLuhan:1994tf; @Ellul:1965uf].[^radicals] If media were to be tools of propaganda, as many people nearly took for granted, then this new sophistication in the theory of information would make the propaganda function of the media amenable to equally sophisticated social theory and empirical research.
 
#### Norbert Wiener

Norbert Wiener was arguably chief among the towering intellectual figures of the midcentury attempting to understand society with the new tools of information theory. Wiener named the new science "cybernetics," a term which gained some limited currency at the time but has since fallen into oblivion. Cybernetics was, essentially, an information theory of society: institutions, organizations, and even social systems more generally are machines comparable to mechanic devices. What they all have in common is that their existence is sustained by mechanisms which effectively send signals and respond to signals. The mechanism in an automobile engine which prevents it from overheating is a mechanism which responds to the signal of too much heat, just as the mechanism of elections is supposed to prevent politicians from pursuing unpopular policies. Information theory would allow us to understand political power and social control as essentially, in their most basic units, dynamics of communication.

For Wiener, then, communication and control were the same thing, and he argued passionately that humanity was on the brink of a new age where communication and control would define society: "The thought of every age is reflected in its technique... If the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries are the age of clocks, and the later eighteenth and nineteenth centuries constitute the age of steam engines, the present time is the age of communication and control."

But Wiener also wrote passionately and ominously that the American state and small elite minorities posed an extraordinary threat in this new age of communication and control. Starting in World War II and continuing throughout the Cold War, the US state was aggressively bringing science under its aegis. This is well-known and well-documented, but it is especially interesting that it is also reflected in the lives and thought of many of the very towering intellectual figures who were at the forefront of the new sciences. Wiener, for instance, believed firmly in the independent scientist and avoided institutional affiliations, although he did choose to help the war effort in anti-aircraft research. "Without any doubt," he wrote, "we possess the world's most highly developed technique of combining the efforts of large numbers of scientists and large quantities of money toward the realization of a single project." [@Wiener:1989ud, 126].[^oppandeinstein]

[^radicals]: To say nothing of concurrent and parallel movements in radical, continental theory. See
@Horkheimer:2009te, @adorno2001culture, and @Debord:1967vn.

[^oppandeinstein]: Oppenheimer, a crucial figure in the American development of an atomic bomb, would later speak out against the hydrogen bomb and was aggressively maligned as a "security threat" by the US government and in the mass media. Einstein, as well, was mocked for his critical attitude toward developments in the state's relationship to science. All of this is to point out that the most towering intellectual figures of this time were beginning to converge on the belief that the institutional dynamics of science were unconscionable.