Selznick (1949) is the first definitive work on the notion of co-optation and remains a seminal reference. Cooptation is defined as "the process of absorbing new elements into the leadership or policy-determining structure of an organization as a means of averting threats to its stability or existence." Formal cooptation is "the sharing of public symbols or administrative burdens of authority and public responsibility, but without an actual transfer of power."

There is ample evidence that non-profit or "third sector" organizations, even if they begin as visionary and militant activist organiztions seeking to challenge the dominant powers and change the status quo distribution of resources in a fundamental way, are eventually co-opted by those who seek to maintain the status quo. Selznick details at length how this happened to the Tenessee Valley Authority, and even straight-laced hard-nosed public administration scholars today find this process to aptly characterize non-profit policy-making networks (O'Toole and Meier 2004).

The conventional wisdom is that the increasingly networked form of the third-sector is leading to a decentralization of power and therefore a more flexible, open, and ultimately democratic structure. But what O'Toole and Meier show in their quantitative analysis of public school districts in Texas is that non-profit organizations and their newtorks tend to be biased toward the more powerful nodes in their network. Increasing networks do not decentralize or redistribute power more publicly, it merely brings larger swaths of the public into the mainstream policy-making orbit, possibly making them identify with the mainstream policy machine and merely making them complicit and partially responsible for its outcomes, without any change that would represent the network moving correspondingly toward the interests of these newly enfranchised nodes. What they find is that as the network expands, the interests of the most powerful nodes continue to be disproportionately advanced, there is no gain in the interests of the less powerful nodes. No sharing of power, only sharing of responsibility for the policy agenda prefered by the most powerful.

So there's nothing especially controversial about the claim that non-profit and third-sector organizations are not sectors of social change contesting exploitation and domination by states and corporations so much as they are subsidiary, auxilliary organizations *for* exploitation and domination by states and corporations. This is not a fringe left-wing idea!

But in the 1970s, the process of co-optation goes global on a scale I don't think we've ever seen before. Milton Friedman wins the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1976, after the policies he championed were forced onto the people of Chile and Argentina (by his students) with brutal repression. One year later, Amnesty International wins the Nobel Peace Prize largely for its work on exactly these human rights abuses. The contradiction is extraordinary. (Klein 2010, 118; Letelier 1976)

It seems at this point as if the "international community," led by Washington, is developing a new type of "social pact." In the immediate post-war period, the US and the countries of Europe saw strong state investment and state-sponsored provision of public services to complement liberal markets, and the result was (relatively) broadly shared economic growth until the early 1970s. This was widely considered to be kind of grand social bargain between capital and labor, where capital would be relatively free but active, Keynesian government spending would make this an "embedded liberalism" (Ruggie 1982). I think we can seize on the extraordinary irony of the 1976-77 Nobel prizes as marking the public, international debut of a very different social pact with which Washington would seek to replace the Keynesian norm of the liberal democracies.

The bargain was that if leftists and working people around the world acknowledged that neoliberal policy agendas would go forward, then in return leftists would be honored and celebrated and pretty well funded if they limited themselves to merely cleaning up the mess. As long as the leftists didn't resist the neoliberal policy agenda, they would be given legitimation and funding to do "humanitarian" work. Of course, if they continued with questioning and resisting policy trends, they would be silenced or mocked for their naivete at best ("do you not understand economics!?"), and at worst killed, tortured, etc. In many countries, remember, leftists were literally disappeared, tortured, and killed en masse. At the same time, states around the world, led by institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank and the Nobel, increased funding of the non-profit sector and human rights organizations.

Poeple who came of age after the 1990s tend to think the "third sector" is the sector of people who want to make the world better, the sector of people who reject the pursuit of profit and want to dedicate themselves to helping people. And of course, the people drawn to this sector often are this kind of person. But what they often fail to realize is that this sector has almost nothing to do with social change and almost everything to do with permitting and even empowering the more exploitative state and corporate ventures to which its members are often very opposed. This whole sector is not about social change or making the world better, it is the dried-up carcass of social change. It is what emerged when the masses who rejected exploitation and domination and who once demanded justice and equality were tortured into submission and then offered money and legitimacy in return for keeping quiet.

Thus, it is not only that the third sector is constrained; it is that, because it has evolved out of what states and corporations would permit here and there, it has actually evolved as an auxilliary to their operations. Cleaning up the mess they leave behind to actually protect the state's and the corporation's public image.

I would argue this is one of the most important dynamics in the past several decades, for it represents a truly global co-optation on a scale and speed never before seen in the history of the world. It basically folded radical left resistance into capitalism in many (although certainly not all) countries around the world, in the space of only about 20 years (about 1970 to 1990).

1.) The third sector has actually been deployed strategically by governments to distance themselves from responsibility. As O'Toole and Meier explain:

> "An obvious instance in this regard is the response of U.S. governments to the HIV/AIDS problem in the early years of the epidemic. As has been documented in some detail (Shilts 1987), American governments—particularly the national government—were slow to accept the policy and political responsibility for the challenges of HIV/AIDS. The topic was contentious, the solutions not obvious, and the target groups marginalized. The HIV problem chal- lenged the standard approaches favored by public health bureaucracies at all levels of government and exposed the “wicked problem” aspects of the issue. As a consequence, for a number of years key political actors showed little interest in tackling the HIV direct-service challenge di- rectly. Nonetheless, activists and some public health ex- perts pressed the government for action. The upshot was a pattern of indirect government support for a network of (primarily) nonprofit, community-based organizations and related groups. The nongovernmental actors carried the work at the front lines, exposed themselves to direct local visibility and challenge, and advocated for the cause and for the partially disempowered constituencies. Meanwhile, national and most state governments were able to distance themselves from service-provision efforts and the more controversial aspects of public education. Work with gay communities and intravenous drug users was conducted at a distance, with many governments establishing plausible deniability with regard to their own responsibility for what- ever actions were under way.5 The Ryan White Compre- hensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act, passed into law in 1990, formalized the arrangement by setting up a pro- gram of grants to support direct services to community- based HIV organizations, provided those organizations would establish and be advised and overseen by a broad set of community organizations—units with which HIV efforts are presumably interdependent (hospitals, social service organizations, homeless shelters, public health units, and so forth)." (p 683)

2.) The third sector also functions to prevent the "grassroots" from growing too wide and broad-based, because that's essentially the most dangerous thing in the world for the dominant groups most invested in the status quo. Have you ever seen the film "How to Survive a Plague?" It tells about the history of ACT UP (AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power) and the fight for political acknowledgement of the HIV crisis and the demands for public support in dealing with it. On one hand, it's inspiring because it's about how the gay community self-organized creatively and militantly and had much success; but on another hand, something it reveals quite well is that when activists start picking up the slack from a state's inadequate provision of public services (in this case, essential health services), first of all this process will be biased from the start because the most well-off segments will have more resources and will therefore be over-represented within the movement from the start. Very striking about the film is that this "grassroots" fight against HIV was in large part driven by fairly well-off, often highly educated, mostly white, mostly cis-gendered males. For instance, at one point, they were literally doing their own medical research! This is pretty cool as far as it goes, but the obvious problem is that people with less resources who are often even more vulnerable, such as transgender people or poorer gay people are likely to remain relatively disempowered even within the "grassroots".

And while it's not necessarily bad in principle for educated gay white men to initiate political organizing to save their lives, the real problem is with the state's institutitionalization of these "grassroots" efforts. What happens, as we see today, is that these early inequalities in the "grassroots" are actually aggressively and strategically institutionalized by the state, and the power imbalances early on become rigidly and fatally divisive. Mananzala and Spade (2008) detail at length how the mainstream gay rights movement has reproduced exclusionary and oppressive hierarchies and have failed to represent the interests of the most vulnerable individuals and groups who have equal claim to the banner of LGBTQ. Mainstream LGBTQ organizations in the third sector (and nearly all mainstream organizations seeking to represent any marginalized group) tend to systematically reproduce the hierarchies and inequalites they originally wanted to fight.

But I and many others on the radical left would argue that this is exactly the function and purpose of the third sector, it's like a political machine that takes "grassroots" demands for justice and offers to the most privileged members just enough to keep them happy, just enough to make them leave behind those who are worse off than themselves, just enough to keep them from actually disrupting the smooth operation of capital, state power, and the current distribution of wealth and resources.[^priceofsilence]

This is exactly what folks like Mananzala and Spade (2008) are testifying to and trying to contest. Projects such as the Sylvia Rivera Law Project are an effort to radicalize third-sector politics and subvert these well-known tendencies of status quo organizations. The degree to which this is possible in the long-run is an open question.

[^priceofsilence]: One could model this formally as a kind of price mechanism. I'm writing this very quickly so the following is probably not quite right, but basically, if the demand for justice goes up (massive contentiousness which threatens the state), while the supply of actual justice remains constant, the price which the state has to pay the grassroots to remain silent goes up. Alternatively, if the demand for justice is constant but there is a sudden decrease in the supply of it (the juntas, for instance), then the price the state has to pay protestors to remain silent increases this way as well. Thus, the Nobel Prize for Amnesty International right after the Nobel Prize for Milton Friedman and the experiments of the Southern Cone is exactly this: the supply of justice decreased, so they had to be willing to pay more for silence.
