Between 1940 and 1960, there was an explosion of research into mass communications. But very different than figures such as Wiener, McLuhan, Luhmann, and the Frankfurt School, the new movement in media research was fundamentally different in its institutional context, its research methods, and ultimately its conclusions. Driven by corporate and government funding, quite naturally it strove toward knowledge that corporations and governments sought.^[Whether the research agendas arose in response to this elite demand, or this elite interest in media research arose in response to the new research methodologies, is a misguided question. For, interestingly, I would hypothesize they are both separately responses to marked advances in information processing: modern statistical research methods were forged with the theoretical and mathematical victories of the war effort just as the post-war communicational activism of the state and corporate sector were. The rise of a government- and corporate-funded institutionalized social science is merely the cooperation of two groups on the same rising tide of power relative to the ethical classes.

In *Personal Influence* (1955, 16-17), Katz and Lazarsfeld inaugurate the "powerful-to-limited effects" narrative of media research which would dominate subsequent political science research on the media. This narrative suggests that the unsophisticated theorists from the previous epoch imagined wrongly that the media has highly potent effects on the attitudes and behaviors of individuals, but that most sophisticated modern researchers find very little evidence of mass communications exerting many direct effects on its audiences. Rather, they suggest that the emerging consensus is that the media are one among many factors that influence individuals in their political attitudes and behaviors. They based their literature review on previous research by Klapper (1950) and Lazarsfeld (1948) but were also influenced heavily by Edward Shils (Pooley 2006).

They themselves are quite fair in acknowledging that possible longer-term, system-level effects of media changes simply require different approaches, but could quite likely represent significant media effects (18-19).

They themselves also point out that the orientation of media research is shaped by the sponsors, who by and large have very specific interests: 

> Now of all the different types of effects which have ever been speculated about or categorized, it is safe to say that these sponsors of research--whose goals underlie so much of mass media research--have selected, by and large, just one kind of effect for almost exclusive attention. We are suggesting that the overriding interest of mass media research is in the study of the effectiveness of mass media attempts to influence--usually to change--opinions and attitudes in the very short run.(18-19,24)

They don't question the possibility that the corporate- and state-centric research funding could actually create a bias in the development of knowledge, because they themselves had many ties to the state and to commerce. (CITATIONS) As Pooley (2006) demonstrates, Lasarzfeld packaged and repacked his findings very differently for the different audiences he shared them with; but the for the most part, he most frequently framed his findings as technical advice for people in commerce, government or public advocacy who wanted to persuade people with the media (Pooley 2006, 3).

"The powerful-to-limited-effects narrative in *Personal Influence*, in turn, was so widely embraced in the late 1950s for a still different set of reasons—because of the scholarly support it lent to the public intellectual defense of American popular culture, in the context of an evolving cold war liberalism (Pooley 2006, 5)."

Klapper's 1957 review of the literature provides a nice overview of the emerging "limited effects" consensus, which today remains largely the dominant perspective in modern political science research. Klapper's summary is very similar to the introduction of *Personal Influence,* and provides a good example of how "limited effects" was becoming a template for media scholars.

Interestingly, Klapper himself stresses quite strongly that the media tend to reinforce "existing conditions" (pp. 457). 

> Regardless of the condition in question—be it the level of public taste, the tendency of audience members toward or away from delinquent behavior, or their vote intention—and regardless of whether the effect in question be social or individual, the media are more likely to reinforce than to change. (pp. 457-458)


> The now classic *People's Choice* found reinforcement, or constancy of opinion, approximately ten times as common as con-version among Erie County respondents exposed to the presidential campaign of 1940, and a nine to one ratio was found in the more elaborate study of Elmira voters in 1948. (pp. 6)


##### But reinforcement is not a "limited effect", it's system-level convervatism

We come to the realization that latent even in the "limited effects" perspective is already an acknowledgement that mass communications are consistently found to exert status quo bias. This could only be considered a "limited effect" by a marketing executive hoping to convince audiences to buy a new product. What they did not seem to appreciate, and what their political scientists of the "limited effects" school also failed to appreciate, is that consistent reinforcement is actually a very significant political effect. It means that the mass media strengthen any status quo institutional arrangement and its distribution of power: if mass media campaigns to create specific changes consistently failed and rather revealed that mass media tend to reinforced pre-existing atttitudes and behaviors despite their content, the "limited effects" school seems to have rather demonstrated that the mass media have robust effects in convincing people *not to change*. It is no surprise that this implication was left at the laboratory table, and this is why a serious sociological perspective on this literature is so essential: this implication is striking to the critical researcher interested in understanding how unjust and unpopular institutitional arrangements seem so effective in extracting passive consent from the populace, but this observations is not instrumentally valuable to marketers or politicians.

Indeed, competing schools of thought working at this time who sought to highlight this implication and extend it were institutionally marginalized. Theodore Adorno of the Frankfurt School actually worked on a team with Lazarsfeld, until he left because his research agenda was inconsistent with the CBS-dominated research group. (Citation)




