As informational efficiency rises, all social actors are empowered to the degree their work involves manipulating information. This is why the 1950s and 1960s saw many relative improvements in the lives of so many actors in the United States: executives of many stripes and perhaps most interestingly in the advertising and marketing sectors ("Mad Men"), consumers (the golden age of suburban idyll), and social reformers (60s radicalism and minority movements) were all empowered to some degree by the new informational powers.

But it also increases the short-term payoffs of manipulation relative to cooperation. Basically, increased information powers have the structure of a prisoner's dilemma. Consider a new information power which can be used to either cooperate or manipulate, a radio for instance. If two people agree to use the radio to increase their cooperation by telling each other truths, they each face what we might call a vulnerability cost but gain what we might call a solidarity value. However, if one of them promises to tell the truth but actually lies about their own type, they pay zero vulnerability cost while still gaining the other person's loyalty. The dominant strategy is to present a false type, and thus it is that in the long-run every advancement in information power actually incentivizes manipulative falsity.

The period from 1947 to 1973 was essentially the first stage of learning process, where various strategies for maneuvering in the digital world are experimented with. Cooperators cooperated more powerfully (the extraordinary potency of late 1960s radicalism), but manipulators also manipulated more powerfully, and the beginning of the 1970s was just the point at which the remaining cooperators defected in the face of a seemingly unstoppable reality of manipulation as destiny. Indeed, the late 60's in particular is a last gasping breathe against instrumentality, and the 1970s marks its defeat by instrumental reason and begins a global ethical race to the bottom, where the left is sucked into a huge global vacuum, pulled either into the orbit of neoliberalism or mystified postures of protest merely bought and sold on the market. Hence all the radicals who gave up the radical struggle and opted for status quo media manipulation (consider the remarkable example of the Latin American revolutionary who laid down arms and went to work for a global PR firm, I have to find the citation for this...) or revolutionary media manipulation (even left-wing terrorism is only a manipulative propaganda of the deed).

The real casualty on both sides of the political divide was the truth and the radicalism and solidarity unique to human honesty.

One vector of this contention is played out in the rise of marketing understood broadly as the manipulation of human beings for earning profit, including the evolution of the marketing individual. This becomes scientific and massive for the first time ever, it's scientificity is evident not only in elite practices such as quantitative marketing research but even in the most horrid and peculiar subcultures such as that of male "pick-up artists" who try to develop a vulgar science of manipulating women.

Another vector of this contention is played out in the organization of production processes. The rationalization of economic production as well as political (bureucratic or legal or military or "policy") production.

But these vectors are really only relatively specific instances of engineering "operations," a generic term in computer, engineering, and management sciences for any process of manipulating inputs to generate certain outputs.

## The Connection Between Media and Globalisation

The crucial connection of media and globalisation is this: as media increased the reach of any particular message (beginning within the nation state and then beyond it), this radically increased the payoffs to speaking consistently with the status quo. When the ability to speak globally occurred, this amplified it. At the same time, the same thing that made this communication possible (the digital revolution) also amplified the political and economic premium to education/skills.

When the amount of people any one person could reach was very small, it was worth it to resist status quo temptations and speak against the status quo.  First of all because capitulating to the status quo did not get you much, and second because others who suffered under the status quo were unlikely to have much emotional investment in it (or at least there was no reason to believe they did, a crucial point regarding the logic of mass communications).

But as the potential reach of a status quo platform increased, this incentivized leftists to drop the radical discourse and trade it in for a hugely widespread but overall small positive effect rather than fight for system change. First because the payoff of a moderate message increased (you reach more people) but second because of the increasing belief that everyone else supports supports the status quo (because everyone else is getting pro-status quo messages).
