Since the end of the 1960s, in the short span of less than 50 years, we have observed the most rapid and geographically far-reaching *pacification* of humanity ever before witnessed in human history.
To detail what I mean, it is necessary to use different registers from different disciplines.
In terms of political attitudes, I have in mind the disppearance of *system-level opposition* in political issues (despite system-level dissatisfaction).
In terms of political behavior, I am most interested in the effective disppearance of *system-level contention*.
In sociological terms, this is noted as the increase in “anomie,” decrease of “trust,” and finally the depletion of “social capital.”
In philosophical terms, this means the global onset of “cynicism” and the failure of the last serious effort at Critical Theory.
In intellectual and emotional life more generally, this is the explosion of instrumental discourse at the cost of expressive discourse. 
This possibility of democratically, collectively controlling the institutions of our society would be crushed by the information revolution in the long-run, for the simple reason that the empowerment it generated was first enjoyed, and most effectively used, by precisely those most invested in the currently dominant institutions we might summarize as “global capitalism.” The institutional power of large state and corporate entites was so increased by the information revolution that it biased the thought and behavior of *more people*, across *larger distances*, and *more rapidly* than any scientific-technological change in the history of the world.
The reason the information revolution was so remarkable is because the science of information is the science of power. In this sense, it was not just a technological development (an increase in power) which increased the economic power of states and corporations, like the steam engine. The information revolution increased the power of power itself, by extending its efficiency and extending its reach to domains it never previously knew how to enter. This is why “globalization” and “mass media” modern finance, and the statistical sciences are all epi-phenomena of this same critical juncture of which our current lives are merely the hangover period.
The way it did this was by increasing the payoff to speaking and acting according to the rules of the current institutions, relative to the payoff of speaking and acting in system-level opposition to institutions. Because it increased the power of power, it forced those with lesser amounts of power to speak the dominant terms in order to achieve any goals whatsoever. And it paid them mightily for it. At the same time, it radically decreased the payoffs to those who preferred the longer-term goal of resisting the status quo temptations and fighting the radical fight for an even better society with fundamentally different institutions.
This is how the global radical currents of the late 1960s were so quickly transformed into speech and behavior compliant with global capitalism and its auxilliary institutions.
that the scientific understanding of information is almost completely monopolized in the hands of those who most benefit from the current arrangement of institutions. This is not to say that an elite cabal is in complete control, quite the contrary: the information revolution has directly empowered the institutions of global capitalism merely *through* the bodies and souls of those who most benefit from it. The information revolution has swept away its most privileged groups from their own power as much as it has swept away our collective political power to change the institutions. This is evidenced by the fact that almost all of the most powerful people in the world have the ethical and intellectual maturity of infants. They are literally too stupid to understand any ethical reality outside of that specific ethics which pays them. The reason the information revolution so completely changes the game is that the scientific understanding of information empowered the already ethically infantile money-seekers to not only abandon themselves in narrow self-interest, but to make the world over in their image. Specifically, it so increased the reach of exploitative capacity, and therefore so increased the profits available, that profit-seeking overtook the world in a sudden blast which we are still only trying to understand. The years from 1917 to today, but in particular the years from 1960 to today, so increased the reach of exploitation, into minds as well across global distances, that it completely changed our entire ethical perspective, but we continue to use old categories enforced by precisely those people whose profits have exploded and who have given themselves the right to change a great deal…
Information power is basically the power behind power itself: with the information revolution, the dominant institutions now protect and extend themselves through an evolutionary logic. Though if this saddens you, it is only because you’re addicted to the idea of power…

## Another way to see the puzzle is to compare globalizations
Another way to look at the puzzle is to consider how, in the first wave of globalization from 1870-1920, there was massive and militant worker resistance. This is the high time of the Second International, militant trade unionism such as the IWW, and sometimes terroristic, organized anarchism. Also great migrations and movement.
Today’s globalization is largely a globalization without people, where migration is not nearly as free as it once was (though of course there are what Saskia Sassen calls “counter-geographies” of globalization composed of often illicit population movements), and where worker resistance is not nearly what it was in the previous period most comparable in terms of global economic change. Comparing globalization today with the previous period is another way to motivate the puzzle: if the main precedent for globalization seems to entail massive popular movement of various sorts, how is it that today’s globalization has proceeded without similar popular tumult?
